---
title: "Adventures in JDBC and the PostgreSQL JDBC driver: Part 6 - Deploying the PostgreSQL JDBC driver into Wildfly"
---

In this article I will show you how to add PostgresSQL into Wildfly as the data source provider.  

Wildfly contains a `datasources` subsystem, and here is the configuration in `standalone/configuration/standalone.xml`:

```xml
<subsystem xmlns="urn:jboss:domain:datasources:4.0">
    <datasources>
        <datasource jndi-name="java:jboss/datasources/ExampleDS" pool-name="ExampleDS" enabled="true" use-java-context="true">
            <connection-url>jdbc:h2:mem:test;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1;DB_CLOSE_ON_EXIT=FALSE</connection-url>
            <driver>h2</driver>
            <security>
	<user-name>sa</user-name>
	<password>sa</password>
            </security>
        </datasource>
        <drivers>
            <driver name="h2" module="com.h2database.h2">
                <xa-datasource-class>org.h2.jdbcx.JdbcDataSource</xa-datasource-class>
            </driver>
        </drivers>
    </datasources>
</subsystem>
```

The above XML data is the configuration of the `urn:jboss:domain:datasources` subsystem. The `datasource` is bound to its `jndi-name`. Wildfly provides an example datasource, and its `jndi-name` is `java:jboss/datasources/ExampleDS`.

In addition, we can see the `driver` used by the example datasource is `h2`, and this driver is defined in `drviers` section.

In the `h2` driver definition, we can see its `module` is `com.h2database.h2`. The Wildfly application server is designed to be modular (See [An introduction to the JBoss Modular Service Container: Part 1 - Basic architecture of the container
](http://wildflyinternals.io/2017/05/10/jboss-msc.html)), so the users can add or remove modules into the server, and the `com.h2database.h2` module is provided by Wildfly by default. The `com.h2database.h2` module contains the H2 database JDBC driver jar file. We can see the module in Wildfly `modules` directory:

```bash
$ pwd
/Users/weli/projs/jboss/wildfly10/wildfly-10.1.0.Final
$ ls modules/system/layers/base/com/h2database/h2/main/
h2-1.3.173.jar module.xml
```

From the above command output, we can see contents of `com.h2database.h2` module. It has a `module.xml`, which is the module descriptor; and it has the `h2-1.3.173.jar`, which is the JDBC driver of the H2 database.

Now we go back to the `driver` definition of the module, and we can see the `xa-datasource-class` definition. In this article, I won't explain the meaning of the `xa-datasource-class` in this article. For now you can just ignore this configuration, and actually it can be removed and Wildfly can still load the JDBC driver correctly. It will scan the driver module and load the JDBC driver automatically(I will write another article on this topic).

After checking the datasource configuration, we can start the Wildfly in standalone mode. Here is the command to start the server:

```bash
$ ./standalone.sh
```

After executing the above command, the server will startup and print log to the screen. From the server output, we can see the related part with the H2 JDBC driver. Here is the relative part of the log: 

```log
23:47:34,019 INFO  [org.jboss.as.connector.subsystems.datasources] (ServerService Thread Pool -- 33) WFLYJCA0004: Deploying JDBC-compliant driver class org.h2.Driver (version 1.3)
23:47:34,030 INFO  [org.jboss.as.connector.deployers.jdbc] (MSC service thread 1-3) WFLYJCA0018: Started Driver service with driver-name = h2
```

From the above log output, we can see Wildfly has found the driver class of H2 database, which is `org.h2.Driver`, and Wildfly will use it to communicate with the underlying H2 database system.

After understanding the Wildfly datasource configuration, now we can add our own PostgreSQL JDBC driver into Wildfly as our datasource provider. The plan is to add a `postgresql` module into Wildfly, and put the compiled PostgreSQL JDBC driver file into the module.

Firstly, we need to create a directory for the `postgresql` module. We need to go to the home directory of our Wildfly. Here is the home path of the `wildfly` server on my local machine:
 
```bash
$ pwd
/Users/weli/projs/jboss/wildfly10/wildfly-10.1.0.Final
```

To create the `postgresql` module, I need to create a directory like this:

```bash
$ mkdir -p  modules/system/layers/base/org/postgresql/main
```

The above command will create the full path of the directories that will be used to store the files of our `postgresql` module.

The next step is to copy the jar file into the module directory. Here is the command:

```bash
$ cp ~/.m2/repository/org/postgresql/postgresql/42.0.1-SNAPSHOT/postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar \
 modules/system/layers/base/org/postgresql/main/
```

The above command will copy our compiled PostgreSQL JDBC driver into the module directory.

Then we need to create a module descriptor file into the `postgresql` module, and the file name should be `module.xml`. Here is the content of the `module.xml`:

```xml
<module xmlns="urn:jboss:module:1.3" name="org.postgresql">
    <resources>
        <resource-root path="postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar"/>
    </resources>
	
    <dependencies>
        <module name="javax.api"/>
        <module name="javax.transaction.api"/>
    </dependencies>
</module>
```

The above XML data contains the definition of our `org.postgresql` module. It defines the name of the module, the resources of the module, and the dependencies of the module. We can see the name of the module is `org.postgresql`, the resource is `postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar`, and the dependencies are `javax.api` and `javax.transaction.api`(The dependencies are provided by relative Wildfly modules).

After creating the `module.xml` and copying the jar file, we have prepared the module for Wildfly to load it. Here are the file contents in Wildfly module directory:

```bash
$ pwd
/Users/weli/projs/jboss/wildfly10/wildfly-10.1.0.Final/modules/system/layers/base/org/postgresql/main
$ ls
module.xml                     postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

After the module is prepared, we need to put the `postgresql` module as a data source into the `datasources` subsystem section of the `standalone/configuration/standalone.xml`. The configuration is similar to the existing `h2` datasource. 

First we need to put a new `driver` entry into the `drivers` section. Here are the contents of the entry:

```xml
<driver name="postgresql" module="org.postgresql">
</driver>				
```

The above configuration adds our `org.postgresql` module as a database driver. We don't have to define the driver class to use in the module, and Wildfly will find it intelligently(As I said, I'll write another article for this topic).

After adding the `driver`, we need to add a `datasource` to use the driver. Here is the definition of the datasource:

```xml
<datasource jndi-name="java:jboss/datasources/weli" pool-name="weli" enabled="true" use-java-context="true">
	<connection-url>jdbc:postgresql://localhost/weli</connection-url>
	<driver>postgersql</driver>
	<security>
		<user-name>weli</user-name>
		<password></password>
	</security>					
</datasource>
```

From the above configuration, we can see the name of our datasource is `java:jboss/datasources/weli`, and the driver we use is `postgresql`. The `connection-url` is used to connect to our created database, and we will use our `weli` database created in previous articles as the datasource. In `security` section we need to provide the `user-name` and the `password` to connect to our database.

Until now we have finished all the configuration, and we can restart the Wildfly server to test its correctness. We even don't need to start our postgresql database server, because Wildfly will just lazily connect to the underlying database system until there are applications explicitly using the datasource. So for now we can stop the Wildfly server and then restart it in standalone mode. We should see the `postgresql` datasource is loaded. Here is the relative log output:

```log
00:33:01,593 INFO  [org.jboss.as.connector.subsystems.datasources] (ServerService Thread Pool -- 33) WFLYJCA0005: Deploying non-JDBC-compliant driver class org.postgresql.Driver (version 42.0)
00:33:01,594 INFO  [org.jboss.as.connector.deployers.jdbc] (MSC service thread 1-3) WFLYJCA0018: Started Driver service with driver-name = postgresql
00:33:01,885 INFO  [org.jboss.as.connector.subsystems.datasources] (MSC service thread 1-3) WFLYJCA0001: Bound data source [java:jboss/datasources/weli]
```

From the above log output, we can see Wildfly automatically found the `org.postgresql.Driver` from our driver module, and it bounds the `java:jboss/datasources/weli` datasource correctly. Please note I haven't started my PostgreSQL database server at this point, and Wildfly won't really use the JDBC driver to connect to database server until there are deployed applications starting to use the datasource.

In this article, I have taught you to add database source into Wildfly. In next article, I'd like to guide you to see the datasource loading process of Wildfly.

