---
title: "Adventures in JDBC and the PostgreSQL JDBC driver: Part 2 - Using JDBC driver to communicate with database server"
abstract: "This is the second part of the `Adventures in JDBC and the PostgreSQL JDBC driver` series of articles. In the first part, we have installed the PostgreSQL database server, and we have downloaded the PostgreSQL JDBC driver source and compile it. In this part we will create a sample application to use JDBC to interact with the underlying database system. The first step is the create a sample application."
---

This is the second part of the `Adventures in JDBC and the PostgreSQL JDBC driver` series of articles. In the first part, we have installed the PostgreSQL database server, and we have downloaded the PostgreSQL JDBC driver source and compile it. In this part we will create a sample application to use JDBC to interact with the underlying database system. The first step is the create a sample application.
 
## Creating Sample Application

Now let's write a sample application, and the project name will be `play-with-jdbc`. The first step is to create a directory for the project:

```
$ mkdir play-with-jdbc
```

The above command will create the `play-with-jdbc` directory. I'd like to use Gradle to manage this project, because Gradle can reuse the local Maven repository, and it's more lightweight to start a small new project compared with Maven. Firstly we  need to enter the `play-with-jdbc` directory:

```
$ cd play-with-jdbc/
```

After entering the directory, we need to run the gradle `init` command to create a Java project. Here is the command and its output:

```
$ gradle init --type java-library
Starting a new Gradle Daemon for this build (subsequent builds will be faster).
:wrapper
:init

BUILD SUCCESSFUL

Total time: 20.568 secs
```

The above command will create a project with type `java-library`. We can check the generated files in below:

```
$ tree
.
├── build.gradle
├── gradle
│   └── wrapper
│       ├── gradle-wrapper.jar
│       └── gradle-wrapper.properties
├── gradlew
├── gradlew.bat
├── settings.gradle
└── src
    ├── main
    │   └── java
    │       └── Library.java
    └── test
        └── java
            └── LibraryTest.java

7 directories, 8 files
```

From the above output, we can see the project created by `gradle` is following the Maven project structure. In addition, it provides a `gradlew` command to wrap and invoke Gradle in this project.  Now let's build the project with this command:

```
$ ./gradlew build
```

The above command will start to download Gradle into the project directory for the first time of running, and this is convenient for us to distribute our project to other people that don't have Gradle installed on their machines. Here is the output of the above command:

```
Starting a new Gradle Daemon for this build (subsequent builds will be faster).
:compileJava
:processResources UP-TO-DATE
:classes
:jar
:assemble
:compileTestJava
:processTestResources UP-TO-DATE
:testClasses
:test
:check
:build

BUILD SUCCESSFUL

Total time: 16.79 secs
```

From the above output, we can see the classes are compiled and packaged into a jar file. The compiled files will be put into `build` directory. Here is the generated content of the `build` directory:

```
$ ls build
classes          libs             test-results
dependency-cache reports          tmp
```

The above output shows the content in `build` directory. We can find the final jar file in the `libs` directory:

```
$ ls build/libs/
play-with-jdbc.jar
```

The above jar file contains the classes in the project. Now we should configure the project to use the JDBC driver we compiled. Firstly we need to find the PostgreSQL JDBC driver we compiled. By convention, Maven puts its installed jar file into `~/.m2` directory, so I can find it here:

```
$ ls ~/.m2/repository/org/postgresql/postgresql/42.0.1-SNAPSHOT/
_remote.repositories           maven-metadata-local.xml       postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.pom
```

The above `postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar` is the library I will use in my `play-with-jdbc` project. Now we need to open the `build.gradle` file in `play-with-jdbc`, and add a line into the `repositories` section:

```
mavenLocal()
```

The above repository refers to the local `~/.m2` repository managed by Maven. Then we need to add a line into `dependencies` section of `build.gradle`:

```
compile 'org.postgresql:postgresql:42.0.1-SNAPSHOT'
```

The above line will make sure the `postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar` can be used during the compilation process. Now that we have prepared the project to use JDBC driver to connect to the database, let's start to write some sample code to use the JDBC driver.

## Using the PostgreSQL JDBC driver

We can write a sample to use the JDBC interfaces and PostgreSQL driver to connect to the underlying database server. Here is the code:
 
```java
package io.weinan.jdbc;

import java.sql.Connection;
import java.sql.DriverManager;
import java.util.Properties;

/**
 * Created by weli on 30/04/2017.
 */
public class DirectConnection {

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        Class.forName("org.postgresql.Driver");

        String url = "jdbc:postgresql://localhost/weli";
        Properties props = new Properties();
        props.setProperty("user","weli");
        props.setProperty("password","");
        props.setProperty("ssl","false");

        Connection conn = DriverManager.getConnection(url, props);

        System.out.println(conn);

    }
}
```

The above code loads the driver into the memory of virtual machine, and connects to the database server with the information like `user`, `password`. We can put the above code into our project like this:

```
src/main/java/io/weinan/jdbc/DirectConnection.java
```

After adding the class file, we need to build the project using Gradle. To build the project, we need to add a `fatJar` task into `build.gradle`:

```groovy
task fatJar(type: Jar) {
    baseName = project.name + '-all'
    from { configurations.compile.collect { it.isDirectory() ? it : zipTree(it) } }
    with jar
}
```

The above task can build a jar file with all the dependencies included, and we need this task to include the `postgresql-42.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar` into the final jar for us. After the above task is added into `build.gradle`, we can build the project using the following command:

```
$ ./gradlew -q fatJar
```

The above command will build the whole project, and produce a jar file with dependencies included. Here is the output:

```
$ ls build/libs/
play-with-jdbc-all.jar
```

As the output shown above, we get the `play-with-jdbc-all.jar`. Now we can use the above jar to invoke our class:

```
$ java -cp build/libs/play-with-jdbc-all.jar io.weinan.jdbc.DirectConnection
org.postgresql.jdbc.PgConnection@6267c3bb
```

From the above output, we can see our code returns a connection to database, and the class that represents the connection is `org.postgresql.jdbc.PgConnection`. That's all for this article. In the next article, we will examining the driver loading process to see how the PostgreSQL JDBC driver works internally. 

