---
title: Using Java RegExp Engine (2) - `region`, `matches` and `find`
---

Now let's see how to use `region` method. Here is the code example:

```
Pattern p = Pattern.compile("(.* )(.* )");
String text = "foo 42 bar xyz";
Matcher matcher = p.matcher(text);
matcher.region(1, text.length());
matcher.find();
```

The `matcher.region(1, text.length())` is to set the start index and the end index of the text that the matcher will search for. As you can see, we have set the matcher to search from text index `1` till the end of the text, so the first character(which is index 0) of `text` will be ignored.

Here's the search code:

```
for (int i = 0; i <= matcher.groupCount(); i++) {
    System.out.println(i + ": " + matcher.group(i));
}
```

And here is the result:

```
0: oo 42 bar
1: oo 42
2: bar
```

We can see the first character in `text`, which is `f` of the `foo`, is bypassed. We can also see from the result that Java RegExp engine is greedy by default, because the group 1 returns `oo 42`, which matches maximum text of pattern `(.* )`.

Now let's see the difference between `matches` and `find` methods of `Matcher` class.

The `matches` method will try to match the pattern with whole text. If the pattern doesn't match the whole text, the method fails.

Otherwise, if there are contents in the text that can match the pattern, the `find` method will match it.

Here is the code example:

```
Pattern p = Pattern.compile("[a-z][a-z][a-z]");
String text = "foo 42 bar xyz";
Matcher matcher = p.matcher(text);
```

I have written a pattern that will match three consecutive alphabets. Now let's try to use 'matches()' method firstly:

```
System.out.println(matcher.matches());
```

The result is `false`. Because the pattern can't match the whole `text`. Now let's try `find()` method:

```
System.out.println(matcher.find());
```

The result is `true`, because the pattern can match partial contents in text, which could be `foo`. And each time we call `find()`, it will try to search the next partial text that can match the pattern. Let's see the code example:

```
Pattern p = Pattern.compile("[a-z][a-z][a-z]");
String text = "foo 42 bar xyz";
Matcher matcher = p.matcher(text);

while (matcher.find()) {
    System.out.println(matcher.group());
}
```

As the example shown above, we will call `find()` method until it can't find anything more. Here's the result:

```
foo
bar
xyz
```

As the result shown above, we can see each time the `find()` method call match the pattern with partial text. We used `group()` method to return the whole matched text. Because our pattern has parentheses, so we can also use `group` method to get the substring we want. Here's the code example:

```
Pattern p = Pattern.compile("([a-z])([a-z])([a-z])");
String text = "foo 42 bar xyz";
Matcher matcher = p.matcher(text);

while (matcher.find()) {
    System.out.println(matcher.group(1));
}
```

Because our pattern is `([a-z])([a-z])([a-z])`，so `group(1)` will be the first `[a-z]` in matched text. Here's the result:

```
f
b
x
```

The result is the first group in the pattern for each found text.

Please note both `matches` and `find` will alter the internal state of the matcher. As we can see above, each `find` will search next part of the text.

Let's see this code example:

```
Pattern p = Pattern.compile("([a-z])([a-z])([a-z])");
String text = "foo";
Matcher matcher = p.matcher(text);

System.out.println(matcher.matches());

while (matcher.find()) {
    System.out.println(matcher.group(1));
}
```

We used `matches` method to match `text` will the pattern, and it will succeed. So the `find` method won't match anything at all, because the previous `matches` method already processed the text and matches the text successfully. The result of above code will be `true` and nothing else.

If we remove the `matcher.matches()`, then the result will be `f`, which is the `matcher.group(1)` output.
